Lyrics videos can be found all over YouTube. Record companies like it for a good reason:
They are cheap, compared to a full video. They can be distributed earlier which means
that there is more than a static image for the many who only listen to music through
YouTube. They also separate the release of the official release of the unofficial fan videos
undisturbed pop up.
Lyrics videos are older than that, however. There is a debate about Bob Dylan's 1965
Subterranean Homesick Blues, which possibly counts.
Perhaps the video of Prince's "Sign O 'The Times" (1987) was the first songtext video ever.
Just moving shapes and words, complete with somewhat questionable spelling and punctuation
that you will encounter today on such an amateur video.
And in 1990 George Michael's "Praying for Time" was simply white text on a black one
background. That was about ten years before, where it would fit exactly between the movies
made in Windows Movie Maker.
You can trace the modern, professional lyric video back to kinetic or dynamic typography.
Inspired by, among other things, Saul Bass films. There was a trend on YouTube
to extract various scenes from films and to enter into dialogue. Jarratt Moody
dynamic "Pulp Fiction" scene is an example of this.
This led to a trend that lasted until 2010 - culminating in a devastating video
about Jonathan Coulton are Shop Vac, uploaded in November 2010. But then it was
Katy Perry d'r management already started with simple lyrics - subtitles and a photo in the background.
They had to compete against those of the fans, who had been making unofficial versions for years.
These unofficial videos often had wrong or badly spelled lyrics, and in some cases
the music was slightly noticed or delayed
Dodge YouTube's Copyright System.
It was Cee-Lo Green in 2010 that was the first mainstream, dynamic and hugely popular songtext video
from the song 'Forget You'. Out of nothing everyone had
need to have one too.
Some were ingeniously designed and brought the art of moving graphics
back in the mainstream. Some ... were bad. But as long as YouTube continues to exist:
Well, they will stay.